•

•

llim.tll'l II

CONTENTS
FoREWORD

iii

PREFACE

vii

UNIT VI

1-66

REPRODUCTION

Chapter 1

: Reproduction in Organisms

3

Chapter 2

: Sexual Reproduction in F1owering Plants

19

Chapter 3

: Human Reproduction

42

Chapter 4

: Reproductive Health

57

UNIT VII

67-142

GENETICS AND EvOLUTION

Chapter 5

: Principles of Inheritance and Variation

69

Chapter 6

: Molecular Basis of Inheritance

95

Chapter 7

: Evolution

126

UNIT VIII

143-190

BIOWGY IN HUMAN WELFARE

Chapter 8

: Human Health and Disease

145

Chapter 9

: Strategies for Enhancement in
Food Production

165

Chapter 10

: Microbes in Human Welfare

179

UNIT IX

191-216

BIOTECHNOWGY

Chapter 11 : Biotechnology : Principles and Processes

193

Chapter 12 : Biotechnology and its Applications

207

IX

UNIT X

217-286

EcOWGY

Chapter 13

Organisms and Populations

219

Chapter 14 : Ecosystem

241

Chapter 15

Biodiversity and Conservation

258

Chapter 16

Environmental Issues

270

X

Chapter I
Reproduction in Organisms
Chapter:2
Sexu at Re produc lion in
flowering Plants
Chapter:3
Human Re produc lion
Chapter4
Reproductive Health

Biology in essence is the story of life on earth. While individual
organisms die without fail, species continue to live through
millions of years unless threatened by na !ural or anthropogenic
extinction. Reproduction becomes a vital process without
which species cannot survive for long. Each individual leaves
its progeny by as exu at or sexua I me a ns. Sexua I mode of
reproduction enables creation ofnewvarianls,so that survival
advantage is enhartced. This unit examines the gerteral
principles unde rtying reproductive processes in living orga nisrns
and then explains the details of this process in flowering plants
and humans as easy to relate representative examples. A related
perspective on human reproductive health and how
reproductive ill health can be avoided is also presented to
complete our understanding of biology ofreproductiort.

_I

PANC HA AAN MJ~..H ES HWARI

(1904-1966)

Bom in November 1SD4 in Japur (Raja; than) Panchanan M aheshwai
ros e to become o ne of the most disting u ished b otanists not only of India
but of the e ntire w orld. He move d to A llahab ad fo r higher educ a tion
where he o b ldned his D.Sc. Du ring hi; colleg e d ays, he w a; i n; p~ed
by Dr W. Dudgeon. a n A m erican m iss ion ary te a cher, to clevelop interest
in Bota ny and especially morphology. His teacher once expressed that
if his student p rogress es ahead of him , it wil give him a great satisfac tion.
Thes e w ord> encouraged Pcnchanan to enquire wha t he could d o for
his te a cher in re turn.
He worked on embryological aspe cts and pop u larise d the u;e of
e mbryolog ical chra cters in taxonomy. He esta blished the D epartment
of Botany, Unile rsity of Delhi a s an impo rta nt cen tre of researc h n
e mbryology and I ssue c ulh.xe. He also e mphasised the need for initia tion
of w ork o n a rtificial culture of im mature embryos. These d ays. tissue
culture ha; beco m e a landmark in science. His work o n tes t tube
ferlili; alion a nd intra -ovaricn p ollina tion won w orldwide a cclaim.
He wa; honoure d w ith felowship of Royal Socie ty of l o ndon (FRS),
India n Na tional Science Acade my a nd several o ther in;titutions of
excellence . He enco urag ed gene ral e d ucation and macle a significant
contrib ution to scho ol e d ucation by h i; leadership in bring ing out the
v e ry f irs t textbooks of Biology for Higher Secon dary Schools pub lished
by NCERT in 1964.

i

I
j

CHAPTER 1

REPRODUCTION IN ORGANISMS

1.1

Asexual
Reproduction

1.2

Sexual
Reproduction

Each a nd every organis m can live only for a cettaln period
of Ume. The period from birth to the na tural death of a n
organism represents Its life span. Life spans of a few
organisms are given In Figure 1.1. Several otherorganisms
a re d rawn for w hich you s hould find out their life spans
and write in the spaces provided. Examine the life s pans
of organisms represented In the Figure 1.1. Is n't It both
Interesting and Intriguing to note that It may be as shmt
as a few days or as long as a few thousand years? Between
these two extremes a re the life s pans of mos t other living
organis ms . You may note that life s pans of organis ms are
not necessarily correla ted With their s izes; the s izes of
crows and pru1·ots ru·e not very different yet their life spans
show a Wide difference. Similarly, a mango tree has a much
s horter life s pan as compared to a peepal tree. Wha tever
be the life s pan, death of evety Individual organis m Is a
certainty, I.e., no IndiVIdual Is Immortal, except single-celled
organisms. Why do we say there is no natural death in
single-celled organisms? Given this reality, have you ever
wondered how vast number of plant a nd a nima l species
have exis ted on eruth for several thousands ofyeru·:::? There
mus t be some processes In llvtng organisms tha t ens ure
this continuity. Yes, we ru·e talking about reproduction,
something that we take for granted.

I

81010GY

Dot! _ _

B,_. lly ( 1-2 we bJ

Crow' ( 15 Y"""'l

llcnle(_)

Fis,-ure 1.1 Approximate life~ of some or@r'Sms

KEfROOOC ~0 N IN ORGMJI~il~$

Reproduction is defined as a biological process in which an
organism gives lise to young ones (offsplingJ similar to itself. The offspling
grow, ~lure and in tum produce new offspling. Thus, there is a cycle
o fbirth, growth and death. Reproduction enables the continuity of the
species, generation after generation. You will study later in Chapter 5
(Principles of lnhelitance and Variation) how genetic valiation is created
and inhelited duling reproduction.
There is a large diversity in the biological world and each organism
has evolved its own mechanism to multiply and produce offspring.
The orgo..'lism's hobito.t, its internal physiology o.nd severo.! other factors
are collectively responsible for how it reproduces. Based on whether
there is participation of one organism or two in the process of
reproduction, it is of two types. When offspring is produced by a single
parent with or without the involvement of gamete formation, the
reproduction is asexual. When two parents (opposite sex) participate in
the reproductive process and also involve fusion of male and female
gametes, it is called sexual reproduction.

1.1 Asi·:xuAL R EPROiHJCTJON
In this method, a single individual (parent) is capable of producing
offspring. As a result, the offspring that are produced are not only
itleuLical Lo oue auoLlier uu L are a! :so exacL copie:s of Llieir pareu L.

Are these offspr(ng l(kety to be genet(calty (c/enttcal or different?
The term clone is used to describe such morphologically and
genetically similar individuals.

Parent cell

(a)

Figure 1.2 Cell division in unicellular orgar.ism: (a) Budding in
yeast; (b) Binary fission in Amoeba
Let u~ see how widespread asexual reproduction is, among different
groups of organisms. Asexual reproduction is common among
single-celled organisms, and in plants and anima:s With relatively simple
organisations. In Protists and Monerans, the organism or the parent
cell divides into two to give lise to new individuals (Figurel.2). Thus,

(b)

BIOLOGY

(a)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. 3 Asexual reproductive structures: (a) Zoospores of chlamydomonas; (b) Conidia of
PeniciUiwn; (c) Buds 1n Hydra; (d) Gemmules 1n sponge

in these organisms cell division is itself a mode of reproduction. Many
single-celled organisms reproduce by binary fission, where a cell di\ides
into two halves and each rapidly grows into an adult (e.g. , Amoeba,
Paramecium). In yeast. the di\ision is unequal and small buds are
produced that remain attached initially to the parent cell which,
eventually gets separated and mature into new yeast organisms [cells).
Members of the Kingdom Fungi and simple plants such as algae
reproduce through special asexual reproductive structures (Figure 1.3).
The most common of these structures are zoospores that usually are
microscopic motile structures. Other common asexual reproductive
structures are conidia (PenidUtum), buds (Hydra) and gemmules (sponge).

(a)
Adventitious
Root

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Fi&....., 1.4 ITe@<aUve pro~ ln =gtosporms: (a) Eyes of pototo; (b) Rhlzome of~;
(c) Bulbll of Asove; (d) Leoi buds of Bryophyium; (e) Offset of water hyo«nlh

You ruwe learnt a.fx>ut oe9etatwe reproduction in p!arlts in Class Xl.
INhat do gou tNnl<- Is oe9etatwe reprodud(On also o. tgpe of asexual.
reproduction? IN1\(j do gou sag so? Is the term done o.pp1i.co.b!e to the
<dJsprin9 formed. bg oe9etotwe reprodud(On?
While in animals ond other Simple orgoru sms lhe term asexual is used
unornbiguously. in plants. lhe term vegetative repreduction is frequently
used. In pl3.nts. llie Wl.its of vegetative propagatlon such .as rurmer.
illlzome. suclter. tuber. olfset. bulb are all capable of g;v;ng rise to new
offspnng (Figure1.4). These structures are called vegetative propagules.
ObViOusly. since llie formation of lliese structures ctces not invohe two

parents.llie process imohed. is .ase:..:u.al.

r

